Base PR use case section with Airflow and dbt Core use case (#2389)
astronomer/docs: learn/use-case-airflow-dbt.md

---
title: "Create an ELT pipeline with Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos, and the Astro Python SDK"
description: "Use Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK in an ELT pipeline to analyze energy data."
id: use-case-airflow-dbt
sidebar_label: "ELT with Airflow + dbt + Astro SDK"
sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/dbt.png' }
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import cosmos_energy_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/use-case-airflow-dbt/cosmos_energy_dag.py';

[dbt Core](https://docs.getdbt.com/) is a popular open-source library for analytics engineering that helps users build interdependent SQL models. Thanks to the [Cosmos](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/) provider package, you can integrate any dbt project into your DAG with only a few lines of code. The open-source [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) greatly simplifies common ELT tasks like loading data and allows users to easily use Pandas on data stored in a data warehouse. 

> This example shows a DAG that loads data about changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries from a local CSV file into a data warehouse. Transformation steps in dbt Core filter the data for a country selected by the user and calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity for that country in different years. Depending on the trajectory of the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in the selected country, the DAG will print different messages to the logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses a DAG to load data about changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries from a local CSV file into a data warehouse. Transformation steps in dbt Core filter the data for a country selected by the user and calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity for that country in different years. Depending on the trajectory of the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in the selected country, the DAG will print different messages to the logs.
```

![My energy DAG screenshot](/img/examples/uc_dbt_my_energy_dag_screenshot.png)

:::info

> For simple instructions on how to use dbt Core with Cosmos, see the [dbt Core tutorial](airflow-dbt.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a more detailed instructions on using dbt Core with Cosmos, see the [dbt Core tutorial](airflow-dbt.md).
```
Seems like this is more complex than the current doc?

This example shows a DAG that loads data about changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries from a local CSV file into a data warehouse. Transformation steps in dbt Core filter the data for a country selected by the user and calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity for that country in different years. Depending on the trajectory of the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in the selected country, the DAG will print different messages to the logs.

![My energy DAG screenshot](/img/examples/uc_dbt_my_energy_dag_screenshot.png)

:::info

For simple instructions on how to use dbt Core with Cosmos, see the [dbt Core tutorial](airflow-dbt.md).

:::

## Before you start

Before trying this example, make sure you have:

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview).

> - An Astro project running locally on your computer. See [Getting started with the Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started-cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/)
```
Cus they're copying it right? They shouldn't need an existing project

- Access to a data warehouse supported by dbt Core and the Astro Python SDK. See [dbt supported warehouses](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/supported-data-platforms) and [Astro Python SDK supported warehouses](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/supported_databases.html). This example uses a local [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) database with a database called `energy_db` and a schema called `energy_schema`.

## Clone the project

Clone the example project from this [Astronomer GitHub](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). Make sure to create a file called `.env` with the contents of the `.env_example` file in the project root directory and replace the connection details with your own.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run the project

To run the example project, first make sure Docker Desktop is running. Then, open your project and run:

```sh
astro dev start
```

This command builds your project and spins up 4 Docker containers on your machine to run it. After the command finishes, open the Airflow UI at `https://localhost:8080/` and trigger your DAG using the play button.
```

If we're going in this direction, we also need to tell users how to run the project. Feel free to play with the language here, but I think this is the minimum someone needs to do to try the project. Also ugh looks like the suggestion is wonky, see the real thing by editing my comment to view the raw text.

> ## Data source

Reviewer: Should this be an H3 under "Project contents"?

```python
load_data = aql.load_file(
    input_file=File(CSV_FILEPATH),
    output_table=Table(
        name="energy",
        conn_id=CONNECTION_ID,
        metadata=Metadata(
            database=DB_NAME,
            schema=SCHEMA_NAME,
        ),
    ),
)
```

Then, the `transform_data` task group is created using the `DbtTaskGroup` class from Cosmos:

```python
dbt_tg = DbtTaskGroup(
    group_id="transform_data",
    dbt_project_name=DBT_PROJECT_NAME,
    conn_id=CONNECTION_ID,
    dbt_root_path=DBT_ROOT_PATH,
    dbt_args={
        "dbt_executable_path": DBT_EXECUTABLE_PATH,
        "schema": SCHEMA_NAME,
        "vars": '{"country_code": "CH"}',
    },
    profile_args={
        "schema": SCHEMA_NAME,
    },
)
```

The Airflow tasks within the task group are automatically inferred by Cosmos from the dependencies between the two dbt models: 

> - The first model, [select_country](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example/blob/main/dags/dbt/my_energy_project/models/select_country.sql), queries the table created by the previous task and creates a subset of the data by only selecting rows for the country that was specified as the `country_code` variable in the `dbt_args` parameter of the `DbtTaskGroup`. See the [dataset](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) for all available country codes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The first model, [`select_country`](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example/blob/main/dags/dbt/my_energy_project/models/select_country.sql), queries the table created by the previous task and creates a subset of the data by only selecting rows for the country that was specified as the `country_code` variable in the `dbt_args` parameter of the `DbtTaskGroup`. See the [dataset](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) for all available country codes.
```

Reviewer: I love how you've linked the GH repo contents into the descriptions as well!

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY"
    from energy_db.energy_schema.energy
    where "COUNTRY" = '{{ var("country_code") }}'
    ```

> - The second model, [create_pct](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example/blob/main/dags/dbt/my_energy_project/models/create_pct.sql), divides both the solar and renewable energy capacity by the total energy capacity for each year calculating the fractions of these values. Note how the dependency between this model and the upstream model `select_country` is created by the dbt `ref` function and automatically translated into a dependency between Airflow tasks by Cosmos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The second model, [`create_pct`](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example/blob/main/dags/dbt/my_energy_project/models/create_pct.sql), divides both the solar and renewable energy capacity by the total energy capacity for each year calculating the fractions of these values. Note how the dbt `ref` function creates a dependency between this model and the upstream model `select_country`. Cosmos then automatically translates this into a dependency between Airflow tasks.
```

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
        "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
        "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
    from {{ ref('select_country') }}
    where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
    ```

> Finally, the `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table using `pandas` and logs the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table and logs the results.
```

```python
@aql.dataframe
def log_data_analysis(df: pd.DataFrame):

    "... code to determine the year with the highest solar and renewable energy capacity ..."

    if latest_year == year_with_the_highest_solar_pct:
        task_logger.info(
            f"Yay! In {df.COUNTRY.unique()[0]} adoption of solar energy is growing!"
        )
    if latest_year == year_with_the_highest_renewables_pct:
        task_logger.info(
            f"Yay! In {df.COUNTRY.unique()[0]} adoption of renewable energy is growing!"
        )
```

> ### Project structure
> 
> The structure of the relevant files in the Astro project is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The files come together in the following project structure:
```
This doesn't feel substantial enough to have in its own topic, but I still like having it here for reference

```text
.
├── dags
│   ├── dbt
│   │   └── my_energy_project
│   │      ├── dbt_project.yml
│   │      └── models
│   │          ├── select_country.sql
│   │          └── create_pct.sql
│   └── my_energy_dag.py
├── include
│   └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
├── Dockerfile
└── requirements.txt
```

> ## Results

Reviewer: @kentdanas @TJaniF Would you be opposed to moving this before the project contents section? It's a small topic that could convince users to download the project.

After the DAG runs, the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task show the proportion of solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.

![Energy Analysis logs](/img/guides/cosmos_energy_analysis_logs.png)

> ## See also

Reviewer: Can we cut this down to like the 3 most important links from all of the categories? I feel overwhelmed with this selection and would rather have a smaller, more curated list of resources.

---

> title: "Create an ELT pipeline with Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "ELT for renewable energy analysis with Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK"
```
I think we should have the titles for these state the use case, and they don't need to be action oriented since we're not treating this as a step by step thing.

description: "Use Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK in an ELT pipeline to analyze energy data."
id: use-case-airflow-dbt

> sidebar_label: "Airflow and dbt Core"

Reviewer 2: I know we don't want to make the side bar labels super long, but I think we should have something that indicates what the 'use case' is as opposed to just the tools. So maybe "ELT with Airflow and dbt Core"? I actually wouldn't even mind doing something like "ELT for renewable energy analysis with Airflow and dbt" although that might be too long...

sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/dbt.png' }
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import cosmos_energy_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/use-case-airflow-dbt/cosmos_energy_dag.py';

> [dbt Core](https://docs.getdbt.com/) is a popular open-source library for analytics engineering that helps users build interdependent SQL models. Thanks to the [Cosmos](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/) provider package, you can integrate any dbt project into your DAG with only a few lines of code. This example combines transformation steps in dbt Core integrated via Cosmos with ELT tasks defined using the [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) to create a pipeline that analyzes energy data.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be helpful to have a little more info up front about what is being created in this example. Maybe a screenshot of the DAG graph?

:::info

The full Astro project used in this example can be cloned from [this repository](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). 

:::

## Before you start

> To use this example you should have an understanding of:

Reviewer 2: I'm leaning towards not including "understanding" links in the Before you start section, because we want people to dive into the example and not think 'oh I need to read all this stuff first'. I think we should put these in the 'See also' (renamed from your Learn more to be consistent with the others we published) section at the end. But if you feel otherwise let me know, happy to debate this :)

- The basics of dbt Core. See [What is dbt?](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/introduction).
- Airflow fundamentals, such as writing DAGs and defining tasks. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).
- The Astro Python SDK. See [Write a DAG with the Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md).
- Airflow task groups. See [Airflow task groups](task-groups.md).
- Airflow connections. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).

> You will need:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before trying this example, make sure you have:
```

## Configure your Astro project

In order to use Cosmos you need to install the dbt adapter for your data warehouse in a virtual environment in your Airflow instance. 

Add the following to your Dockerfile:

```Dockerfile
# install dbt into a virtual environment
# replace dbt-postgres with another supported adapter if you're using a different warehouse type
RUN python -m venv dbt_venv && source dbt_venv/bin/activate && \
pip install --no-cache-dir dbt-postgres && deactivate
```

Add the Cosmos and Astro Python SDK packages to the requirements.txt file in your project:

```text
astronomer-cosmos==0.7.0
astro-sdk-python==1.6.1
```

Set the following environment variable to enable deserialization of Astro Python SDK objects:

```text
AIRFLOW__CORE__ALLOWED_DESERIALIZATION_CLASSES = airflow\.* astro\.*
```

> ## Connect Airflow to your database

Reviewer 2: I'm leaning towards combining this with the previous section, so we have one header for "setup" type stuff. I like the "Basic setup" that Modal uses, so we could do that and have two subsections within it. Or open to other suggestions here too.

Reviewer 2: I actually like this layout, but for any file we're modifying I would keep the entire contents (e.g. the whole Dockerfile). But I like the text and presentation here a lot. I think assuming the user knows enough about Airflow/the Astro project is fine, since we're providing a link to a repo they can clone and not do anything themselves, or they can always read more as needed.

This example runs ELT operations in a data warehouse. Set a connection to your data warehouse either in the Airflow UI or as an environment variable. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md) for more information. Both dbt Core via Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK will be able to use the same connection.

For a connection to a PostgreSQL database, define the following parameters:

- **Connection ID**: `db_conn`.
- **Connection Type**: `Postgres`.
- **Host**: Your Postgres host address.
- **Schema**: Your Postgres database (`energy_db`). 
- **Login**: Your Postgres login username.
- **Password**: Your Postgres password.
- **Port**: Your Postgres port.

> ## Get the data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The data
```
Let's update this section to be more "about the data" and take out the tutorial language. And after a brief description of the data, you can say something like To try the example: and then the 1 and 2 steps.

Also maybe let's move this section up to be right after Before you start. So we describe the use case in the intro, then talk about the data, and then go into basic setup. Wdyt?

This tutorial uses an Airflow DAG to orchestrate dbt Core jobs that calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in different years for a selected country.

1. [Download the CSV file](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) from GitHub.
2. Save the downloaded CSV file in the `include` directory of your Astro project.

This tutorial uses a subset of the original data. The full data source provided by Open Power System Data can be found [here](https://doi.org/10.25832/national_generation_capacity/2020-10-01).

> ## Prepare your dbt Core models

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## dbt Core models
```
I'm debating taking some of the action language out to make this more "presenting a use case" than instructional, which would require modifying the text a bit too.

# create a variable called country_code and give it the default value "FR" (for France)
vars:
  country_code: "FR"
```

Add these two models to your dbt Core project:

`select_country.sql`:

```sql
select 
    "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY"
from energy_db.energy_schema.energy
where "COUNTRY" = '{{ var("country_code") }}'
```

`create_pct.sql`:

```sql
select 
    "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
    "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
    "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
from {{ ref('select_country') }}
where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you will need to adapt the `FROM` statement in the first model and potentially the SQL dialect in both dbt models.

:::

After adding all files you should have this structure in your Astro project.

```text
.
└── dags
│   └── dbt
│       └── my_energy_project
│          ├── dbt_project.yml
│          └── models
│              ├── select_country.sql
│              └── create_pct.sql
└── include
    └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
```

> ## Create a DAG

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The ELT DAG
```

- The `transform_data` task group is created from the dbt models. The task group will contain two nested task groups with two tasks each, one for `dbt run`, the other for `dbt test`.
- The `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table using `pandas` and logs the results.

The `DbtTaskGroup` function of the Astro dbt provider package automatically scans the `dbt` folder for dbt projects and creates a task group (`transform_data` in this example) containing Airflow tasks for running and testing your dbt models. Additionally, the provider can infer dependencies within the dbt project and will set your Airflow task dependencies accordingly.

You can choose which country's data to analyze by specifying your desired `country_code` in the `dbt_args` parameter of the DbtTaskGroup. See the [dataset](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) for all available country codes.

> ## Result

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Results
```

Open the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task to see the proportional solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.

![Energy Analysis logs](/img/guides/cosmos_energy_analysis_logs.png)

> ## Learn more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## See also
```

> ## Learn more

Reviewer 2: Maybe if we have a long-ish list of things in this section we should break it out into a few lists, like:

Tutorials:
- one
- two

Documentation:
- one
- two

Webinars:
- one

> - Tutorial: [Orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow and Cosmos](airflow-dbt.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow and Cosmos](airflow-dbt.md).
```

> - Webinar: [The easiest way to orchestrate your dbt workflows from Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/the-easiest-way-to-orchestrate-your-dbt-workflows-from-airflow/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [The easiest way to orchestrate your dbt workflows from Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/the-easiest-way-to-orchestrate-your-dbt-workflows-from-airflow/).
```

> - Tutorial: [Orchestrate dbt Cloud jobs with Airflow](airflow-dbt-cloud.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Orchestrate dbt Cloud jobs with Airflow](airflow-dbt-cloud.md).
```

> - Documentation: [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html).
```

> - Documentation: [Astronomer Cosmos](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Astronomer Cosmos](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/).
```

---
title: "ELT for renewable energy analysis with Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK"
description: "Use Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK in an ELT pipeline to analyze energy data."
id: use-case-airflow-dbt

> sidebar_label: "ELT of energy data with Airflow and dbt Core"

Reviewer 2: Hmm, looking at the side bar it is a little much....maybe we start with "ELT with Airflow, dbt, and the Astro SDK" and then if we end up with too many examples that are "ELT" with those tools we can reevaluate.

This example shows a DAG that loads data about changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries from a local CSV into a data warehouse. Transformation steps in dbt Core integrated via Cosmos filter the data for a country selected by the user and calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity for that country in different years. Depending on the trajectory of the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in the selected country, the DAG will print different messages to the logs.

![My energy DAG screenshot](/img/examples/uc_dbt_my_energy_dag_screenshot.png)

:::info

The full Astro project used in this example can be cloned from [this repository](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). 

:::

> ## The Data

Reviewer 2: Oops, I wasn't clear before, I think this section should come right _after_ Before you start :)

> This example analyzes changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries. The full source data provided by [Open Power System Data](https://doi.org/10.25832/national_generation_capacity/2020-10-01) includes information on many types of energy capacity, the subset used in this example can be found in this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example analyzes changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries. The full source data provided by [Open Power System Data](https://doi.org/10.25832/national_generation_capacity/2020-10-01) includes information on many types of energy capacity. The subset of data used in this example can be found in this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv), and is read by the DAG from the `include` folder of the Astro project.
```

## Before you start

Before trying this example, make sure you have:

> - The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview) and an Astro project created by running `astro dev start`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview).
- An Astro project running locally on your computer. See [Getting started with the Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started-cli).
```

- Access to a data warehouse supported by dbt Core and the Astro Python SDK. See [dbt documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/supported-data-platforms) for all supported warehouses of dbt Core and the [Astro Python SDK documentation](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/supported_databases.html) for all supported warehouses of the Astro Python SDK. This example uses a local [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) database with a database called `energy_db` and a schema called `energy_schema`.

> ## Basic setup

Reviewer 2: Let's update this section to what you have in your comment, but keep the explanatory text about the Airflow connection, if that makes sense.

# create a variable called country_code and give it the default value "FR" (for France)
vars:
  country_code: "FR"
```

The `my_energy_project` dbt project contains two models:

`select_country.sql`:

```sql
select 
    "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY"
from energy_db.energy_schema.energy
where "COUNTRY" = '{{ var("country_code") }}'
```

`create_pct.sql`:

```sql
select 
    "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
    "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
    "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
from {{ ref('select_country') }}
where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you will need to adapt the `FROM` statement in the first model and potentially the SQL dialect in both dbt models.

:::

The resulting file structure of the Astro project is:

```text
.
└── dags
│   └── dbt
│       └── my_energy_project
│          ├── dbt_project.yml
│          └── models
│              ├── select_country.sql
│              └── create_pct.sql
└── include
    └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
```

## The ELT DAG

> Add the following Airflow DAG to your Astro project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is the ELT DAG:
```

<CodeBlock language="python">{cosmos_energy_dag}</CodeBlock>

This DAG consists of two tasks and one task group:

- The `load_file` task uses the [Astro Python SDK `load file` operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/load_file.html) to load the contents of the local CSV file into the data warehouse.
- The `transform_data` task group is created from the dbt models. The task group contains two nested task groups with two tasks each, one for `dbt run`, the other for `dbt test`.
- The `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table using `pandas` and logs the results.

> The `DbtTaskGroup` function of the Astro dbt provider package automatically scans the `dbt` folder for dbt projects and creates a task group (`transform_data` in this example) containing Airflow tasks for running and testing your dbt models. Additionally, the provider can infer dependencies within the dbt project and will set your Airflow task dependencies accordingly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cosmos' `DbtTaskGroup` function automatically scans the `dbt` folder for dbt projects and creates a task group (`transform_data` in this example) containing Airflow tasks for running and testing your dbt models. Additionally, Cosmos can infer dependencies within the dbt project and will set your Airflow task dependencies accordingly.
```

You can choose which country's data to analyze by specifying your desired `country_code` in the `dbt_args` parameter of the DbtTaskGroup. See the [dataset](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) for all available country codes.

## Results

> Open the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task to see the proportional solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the DAG runs, the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task show the proportion of solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.
```

![Energy Analysis logs](/img/guides/cosmos_energy_analysis_logs.png)

## See also

Tutorials:

- [Orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow and Cosmos](airflow-dbt.md).
- [Orchestrate dbt Cloud jobs with Airflow](airflow-dbt-cloud.md).
- [Write a DAG with the Astro Python SDK](astro-python-sdk.md).

> - [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Removing get started since the others we link assume some level of Airflow knowledge already and also have get started as a prereq.

Concept guides:

> - [What is dbt?](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/introduction).

Reviewer 2: I think we only need one dbt doc link in See also, so I would pick this one or the docs below, whichever you think is most helpful/relevant.

---

> title: "ELT for renewable energy analysis with Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Create an ELT pipeline with Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos, and the Astro Python SDK"
```
Only because the renewable stuff might discourage googlers from clicking if they wanted more generalized advice

description: "Use Airflow, dbt Core, Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK in an ELT pipeline to analyze energy data."
id: use-case-airflow-dbt

> sidebar_label: "ELT with Airflow, dbt + Astro SDK"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: "ELT with Airflow + dbt + Astro SDK"
```

sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/dbt.png' }
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import cosmos_energy_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/use-case-airflow-dbt/cosmos_energy_dag.py';

[dbt Core](https://docs.getdbt.com/) is a popular open-source library for analytics engineering that helps users build interdependent SQL models. Thanks to the [Cosmos](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/) provider package, you can integrate any dbt project into your DAG with only a few lines of code. The open-source [Astro Python SDK](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) greatly simplifies common ELT tasks like loading data and allows users to easily use Pandas on data stored in a data warehouse. 

> This example shows a DAG that loads data about changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries from a local CSV into a data warehouse. Transformation steps in dbt Core integrated via Cosmos filter the data for a country selected by the user and calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity for that country in different years. Depending on the trajectory of the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in the selected country, the DAG will print different messages to the logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows a DAG that loads data about changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries from a local CSV file into a data warehouse. Transformation steps in dbt Core filter the data for a country selected by the user and calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity for that country in different years. Depending on the trajectory of the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in the selected country, the DAG will print different messages to the logs.
```

![My energy DAG screenshot](/img/examples/uc_dbt_my_energy_dag_screenshot.png)

:::info

> The full Astro project used in this example can be cloned from [this repository](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To skip the setup for this example, clone the final example from the [Astronomer GitHub](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). 
```
Random Q: do you think it would be better to provide a [JSON connection variable](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/connection.html#storing-connections-in-environment-variables) in the example project so that users can configure the whole thing from code? That feels like the path of least resistance if someone's already wanting to jump to the end. We could then include a note in the README or this doc about needing to configure the JSON.

:::

## Before you start

Before trying this example, make sure you have:

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview).
- An Astro project running locally on your computer. See [Getting started with the Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started-cli).

> - Access to a data warehouse supported by dbt Core and the Astro Python SDK. See [dbt documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/supported-data-platforms) for all supported warehouses of dbt Core and the [Astro Python SDK documentation](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/supported_databases.html) for all supported warehouses of the Astro Python SDK. This example uses a local [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) database with a database called `energy_db` and a schema called `energy_schema`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to a data warehouse supported by dbt Core and the Astro Python SDK. See [dbt supported warehouses](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/supported-data-platforms) and [Astro Python SDK supported warehouses](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/supported_databases.html). This example uses a local [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) database with a database called `energy_db` and a schema called `energy_schema`.
```

> ## The Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data source
```

This example analyzes changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries. The full source data provided by [Open Power System Data](https://doi.org/10.25832/national_generation_capacity/2020-10-01) includes information on many types of energy capacity. The subset of data used in this example can be found in this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv), and is read by the DAG from the `include` folder of the Astro project.

> ## Basic setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setup
```

> Modify your Astro project with the following instructions.

Reviewer: Hm I think we should still use numbered steps for these like we do for tutorials. We should just avoid topic-level steps to simplify the page layout.

> `Dockerfile`:
> 
> ```Dockerfile
> FROM quay.io/astronomer/astro-runtime:8.4.0
> 
> # install dbt into a virtual environment
> # replace dbt-postgres with another supported adapter if you're using a different warehouse type
> RUN python -m venv dbt_venv && source dbt_venv/bin/activate && \
> pip install --no-cache-dir dbt-postgres && deactivate
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add the following lines to your `Dockerfile` under the `FROM` statement:

    ```Dockerfile
    # install dbt into a virtual environment
    # replace dbt-postgres with another supported adapter if you're using a different warehouse type
    RUN python -m venv dbt_venv && source dbt_venv/bin/activate && \
    pip install --no-cache-dir dbt-postgres && deactivate
```
```

Reviewer: Repeat this pattern for the remaining configs

`requirements.txt`:

```text
astronomer-cosmos==0.7.0
astro-sdk-python==1.6.1
```

`.env`:

```text
AIRFLOW__CORE__ALLOWED_DESERIALIZATION_CLASSES = airflow\.* astro\.*
```

`/include`:

Add the CSV file with the energy data to the `include` folder in your Astro project.

> #### Airflow connections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Airflow connections
```

This example runs ELT operations in a data warehouse. Set a connection to your data warehouse either in the Airflow UI or as an environment variable. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md) for more information. Both dbt Core via Cosmos and the Astro Python SDK will be able to use the same connection.

For a connection to a PostgreSQL database, define the following parameters:

- **Connection ID**: `db_conn`.
- **Connection Type**: `Postgres`.
- **Host**: Your Postgres host address.
- **Schema**: Your Postgres database (`energy_db`). 
- **Login**: Your Postgres login username.
- **Password**: Your Postgres password.
- **Port**: Your Postgres port.

> ## dbt Core models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### dbt Core models
```
This structure is confusing because this looks like reference material, but there's no steps for the user to follow to actually get this in their project. This also runs parallel to the "Setup" in topic level, so it looks like something else entirely

> When using Cosmos, any dbt project can be converted into an Airflow task group by putting it in a `dbt` directory within the Astro projects `dags` folder.

Reviewer: I think we need to be much more explicit with the steps here, similar to the structure I suggested for updating the various Astro project files above

# create a variable called country_code and give it the default value "FR" (for France)
vars:
  country_code: "FR"
```

The `my_energy_project` dbt project contains two models:

`select_country.sql`:

```sql
select 
    "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY"
from energy_db.energy_schema.energy
where "COUNTRY" = '{{ var("country_code") }}'
```

`create_pct.sql`:

```sql
select 
    "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
    "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
    "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
from {{ ref('select_country') }}
where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you will need to adapt the `FROM` statement in the first model and potentially the SQL dialect in both dbt models.

:::

The resulting file structure of the Astro project is:

```text
.
└── dags
│   └── dbt
│       └── my_energy_project
│          ├── dbt_project.yml
│          └── models
│              ├── select_country.sql
│              └── create_pct.sql
└── include
    └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
```

## The ELT DAG

> Here is the ELT DAG:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following DAG to your `dags` directory in a file called `my_energy_dag.py`.
```

## Clone the project

You can clone the example project from this [Astronomer GitHub](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). Make sure to create a file called `.env` with the contents of the `.env_example` file in the project root directory and replace the connection details with your own.

## Data source

This example analyzes changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries. The full source data provided by [Open Power System Data](https://doi.org/10.25832/national_generation_capacity/2020-10-01) includes information on many types of energy capacity. The subset of data used in this example can be found in this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv), and is read by the DAG from the `include` folder of the Astro project.

> ## Project contents

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with this new layout overall, but I don't love having `Project contents` with very direct, technical descriptions of the code without any code itself. I guess we're assuming people will clone the project and be looking at it alongside the doc, but if they _don't_ clone the project, I would find this section by itself very confusing.

I think if we're going to keep this structure, we need to adjust what goes in this section. So maybe we can:

1. Make the description of the project contents a tiny bit higher level and integrate the use case throughout more. e.g. describe what the tasks do in the context of the use case, and also describe what the dbt models are actually doing. Having it only mention the DAG and not the dbt models doesn't make sense in the context of this use case.
2. Take some code snippets from the DAG and put them alongside each bullet where we're describing what happens. This is kind of how [modal](https://modal.com/docs/guide/ex/stable_diffusion_cli) does it, and I think would help orient users to what's going on in each part of the DAG.

## Clone the project

You can clone the example project from this [Astronomer GitHub](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). Make sure to create a file called `.env` with the contents of the `.env_example` file in the project root directory and replace the connection details with your own.

## Data source

This example analyzes changes in solar and renewable energy capacity in different European countries. The full source data provided by [Open Power System Data](https://doi.org/10.25832/national_generation_capacity/2020-10-01) includes information on many types of energy capacity. The subset of data used in this example can be found in this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv), and is read by the DAG from the `include` folder of the Astro project.

## Project contents

> This project consists of one DAG, [my_energy_dag](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example/blob/main/dags/my_energy_dag.py), which performs the whole ELT process using two tasks defined with Astro Python SDK operators and a task group created through Cosmos from a dbt project consisting of two models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This project consists of one DAG, [my_energy_dag](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example/blob/main/dags/my_energy_dag.py), which performs an ELT process using two tasks defined with Astro Python SDK operators and one task group created through Cosmos that orchestrates a dbt project consisting of two models.
```

        "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
    from {{ ref('select_country') }}
    where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
    ```

Finally, the `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table using `pandas` and logs the results.

```python
@aql.dataframe
def log_data_analysis(df: pd.DataFrame):

    "... code to determine the year with the highest solar and renewable energy capacity ..."

    if latest_year == year_with_the_highest_solar_pct:
        task_logger.info(
            f"Yay! In {df.COUNTRY.unique()[0]} adoption of solar energy is growing!"
        )
    if latest_year == year_with_the_highest_renewables_pct:
        task_logger.info(
            f"Yay! In {df.COUNTRY.unique()[0]} adoption of renewable energy is growing!"
        )
```

## Results

After the DAG runs, the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task show the proportion of solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.

![Energy Analysis logs](/img/guides/cosmos_energy_analysis_logs.png)

> ## Setup

Reviewer 2: If we organize like this, I'm on the fence whether we actually need a Setup section, or whether we write these with the intention of people only cloning the repo or running in GH codespaces. If connections or things like that are needed, we could put notes about them in `Clone the project`, and they would also go in the repo readme.

Overall I want to make these distinct from a tutorial - we're focusing on highlighting the value of the tools and what use cases are possible in Airflow, not the nitty gritty of how to set it up.

    country_code: "FR"
    ```

4. Create a `models` directory in the `my_energy_project` dbt project.

5. Create a file called `select_country.sql` in the `models` directory with the following contents:

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY"
    from energy_db.energy_schema.energy
    where "COUNTRY" = '{{ var("country_code") }}'
    ```

6. Create a file called `create_pct.sql` in the `models` directory with the following contents:

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
        "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
        "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
    from {{ ref('select_country') }}
    where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
    ```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you might need to adapt the `FROM` statement in the first model and potentially the SQL dialect in both dbt models.

:::

### DAG

Add the following DAG to your `dags` directory in a file called `my_energy_dag.py`.

<CodeBlock language="python">{cosmos_energy_dag}</CodeBlock>

### Project structure

> The resulting file structure of the Astro project is:

Reviewer 2: Seems like we could move this up into Project contents?
